So let's start out by talking about
exception handling in general and the types of exceptions.
An exception is an event that occurs
during the execution of a programme,
that disrupts the normal flow of instructions.
It's usually caused by an abnormal condition
or an unexpected use of a resource.
The java.lang.Throwable class and all its subclasses are,
collectively, the exception classes.
So as you can see by this diagram on the screen here,
Throwable has two subclasses, exception and error.
The Error Class, Java's naming standard
is to use the Error suffix for classes that extend Error.
When a dynamic linking failure
or other hard failure in the Java virtual machine occurs,
the virtual machine throws an Error.
The IOError is probably the best know Error
in this hierarchy, but some others are
the AnnotationFormatError, AssertionError,
CoderMalfunctionError, FactoryConfigurationError,
and a LinkageError, which includes the
BootstrapMethodError, ClassCircularityError,
ClassFormatError, ExceptionInitializerError,
IncompatibleClassChangeError, NoClassDeffFoundError,
UnsatsifiedLinkError, and VerifyError.
Moving on there's also ServiceConfigurationError,
ThreadDeath, TransformerFactoryConfigurationError,
and VirtualMachineError which includes
InternalError, OutOfMemoryError,
StackOverflowError, and UnknownError.
In the Exception Class, Java's naming standard
is to use the Exception suffix for classes
that extend Exception.
Objects that derive from the Exception class are
generally the predictable or known errors
that indicate that a problem occurred,
but it's not necessarily a serious problem,
and your recovery options may exist.
We'll be discussing the Exception classes at length.
So now that we know what an exception is,
we need to review what happens when one occurs.
When an error happens, the method from which
the error originated creates a special object,
an exception object, and hands it off
to the runtime system.
The exception object contains information
about the error, and the state of the programme
when the error occurred.
Creating an exception object and handing it
to the runtime system is called throwing an exception.
You can manually throw an exception by identifying
a scenario you consider an error,
but in many cases, it's the Java Virtual Machine
throwing exceptions automatically.
Throwing an exception is only half the story.
The runtime system then attempts
to find something to handle the exception.
Handling the exception means there's code
that identifies itself as responsible
for responding to the error condition that occurred.
And like life, there aren't always volunteers
(laughs) or assignees, however.
The runtime system trying to find a handler
for an exception object could be likened
to a frustrated sales customer
working his or her way up through management
as they query whether this particular manager
can handle their complaint.
The manager will refer the customer to the next manager
above themselves or hopefully at some point
handle the complaint themselves
and let the customer progress to the next step
of the sale or refund.
A method can identify itself as a responsible party,
able to handle the exception, by declaring
a block of code called an exception handler.
The runtime system searches the call stack
for a method that contains such a block of code,
starting with the current method,
and searching the call stack in reverse order
until it finds a method with a handler.
Remember that a call stack is a listing of programme
counter addresses (PCs) representing instructions,
or method calls, from within the programme which identifies
the path the application executed to get
to the current instruction or statement.
The runtime system looks for a handler
that must catch the right type of exception that was thrown,
or the runtime system will continue to look
for a matching responsible party.
And if no handler is ever found,
the thread that creates the error or exception dies.
And you can see in this diagram, an example
of what's happening in that scenario.
Right, so let's end the video here
and in the next one, we'll swing over to our IDE
and we'll start putting some code together.
See you in the next video.